Data collections and collection references (#3233)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/reference/api-reference.mdx

[See the `Content Collection` guide](/en/guides/content-collections/#defining-a-collection-schema) for example usage.

### `reference()`

**Type:** `(collection: string) => ZodEffects<ZodString, { collection, id: string } | { collection, slug: string }>`

The `reference()` function is used in the content config to define a relationship, or "reference," from one collection to another. This accepts a collection name and validates the entry identifier(s) specified in your content frontmatter or data file.

> This example defines references from a blog author to the `authors` collection, and an array of related posts to the same `blog` collection:

Reviewer: Nit: unnecessary comma
```suggestion
This example defines references from a blog author to the `authors` collection and an array of related posts to the same `blog` collection:
```

[See the `Content Collection` guide](/en/guides/content-collections/#querying-collections) for example usage.

### `getEntry()`

<p>
  <Since v="2.5.0" />
</p>

**Types:**

- `(collection: string, contentSlugOrDataId: string) => CollectionEntry<collection>`
- `({ collection: string, id: string }) => CollectionEntry<collection>`
- `({ collection: string, slug: string }) => CollectionEntry<collection>`

> `getEntry()` is a function that retrieves a single collection entry by collection name and either the entry `id` (for JSON or YAML collections) or entry `slug` (for Markdown or MDX collections).

Reviewer 2: Quick question: reading the content-collections page, it made it seem more like `id` existed for both, but `slug` is only available for `type: content`. This makes it sound like you choose `id` for data, and slug for content.

Also, this says Markdown or MDX but doesn't mention Markdoc. So, we should maybe future-proof (and make things shorter!) by refering to the `type` type (right now, `data` and `content`) when we need to differentiate, vs file type?

Author: Correct, `id` _does_ exist for both. But in practice, we've found that users rarely use the _Content_ `id` since it isn't URL-friendly. This means it isn't used for `getStaticPaths()`, isn't used for SSR lookups, isn't used for... much of anything. The goal is to treat `slug` as the de-facto identifier now that we know how people use it, and come up with a much nicer solution come v3!

> ```astro
> ---
> import { getEntry } from 'astro:content';
> 
> // Get `src/content/blog/enterprise.md`
> const enterprisePost = await getEntry('blog', 'enterprise');
> 
> // Get `src/content/captains/captain-kirk.yaml`
> const captainProfile = await getEntry('captains', 'captain-kirk');
> ---
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I'm not sure I'd include this example at all, but rather continue right into getting the `data` etc., then if necessary, show all things in one sample. I think it's cleaner to state what this function can all be used for, then show the examples in one sample snippet.

`getEntry()` can also be used to get referenced entries to access the `data`, `body`, or `render()` properties:

```astro
---
import { getEntry } from 'astro:content';

> const enterprisePost = await getEntry('blog', 'enterprise);

Reviewer: Highlighting fix
```suggestion
const enterprisePost = await getEntry('blog', 'enterprise');
```

// Get the profile referenced by `data.captain`
const captainProfile = await getEntry(enterprise.data.captain);
---
```

> See the `Content Collection` guide for examples of [querying](/en/guides/content-collections/#querying-collections) and [references](/en/guides/content-collections/#resolving-references).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the `Content Collections` guide for examples of [querying collection entries](/en/guides/content-collections/#querying-collections).
```
References is included in the querying section, and in fact, I have another note coming that I'm not entirely sure `resolving-references` needs to be its own section in the querying section anyway.  :smile:

### `getEntries()`

<p>
  <Since v="2.5" />
</p>

**Types:**

- `(Array<{ collection: string, id: string }>) => CollectionEntry<collection>`
- `(Array<{ collection: string, slug: string }>) => CollectionEntry<collection>`

> `getEntries()` is a function that retrieves multiple collection entries with the same collection name. This is useful for resolving an array of [references](en/guides/content-collections/#defining-collection-references) to their associated `data`, `body`, and `render()` properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`getEntries()` is a function that retrieves multiple collection entries from the same collection. This is useful for [returning an array of referenced entries](/en/guides/content-collections/#defining-collection-references) to access their associated `data`, `body`, and `render()` properties.
```
Fixed the link syntax. 

Also, "references" felt like a strange link text. Out of context, it doesn't mean very much, so it should be a slightly longer phrase, I think.

AND we don't really define/use "a reference, n." elsewhere -- we talk about the `reference()` utility. I'm seeing how "a referenced entry" feels as the noun that we use.

non-blocking nit: "retrieve/return for access to properties" feels a little more our existing style vs. "resolve to."

```astro
---
import { getEntries } from 'astro:content';

> const enterprisePost = await getEntry('blog', 'enterprise);

Reviewer: Highlighting fix part 2
```suggestion
const enterprisePost = await getEntry('blog', 'enterprise');
```

// Get related posts referenced by `data.relatedPosts`
const captainProfile = await getEntries(enterprise.data.relatedPosts);
---
```

> ### `getEntryBySlug()`

Reviewer 2: Can we... deprecate `getEntryBySlug`? :sweat_smile:  I mean, *say that* it's deprecated/legacy? (Even if we don't actually deprecate for a loooong time.) I feel like it's just messy to keep this around, and define/explain it if another function entirely replaces it. It would be cleaner to just say update, because this will eventually go away.

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to remember/hunt down what we did for deprecation in the past. I feel like we actually used the `<Badge /> component or something like that for emphasis. I think updating the note for now should be fine, though!

Author: Looks like we use `:::caution[Deprecated]` for `Astro.canonicalURL`. Think that's a good way forward!

### Collection Entry Type

> Query functions including [`getCollection()`](#getcollection) and [`getEntry()`](#getentry) each return entries with the `CollectionEntry` type. This type is available as a utility from `astro:content`:

Reviewer 2: I know you've said "including.." so this doesn't need to be a comprehensive list, but I'll also note that `getEntries()` is not mentioned here.

#### `id`

**Example Type for "content" collections:** `'entry-1.md' | 'entry-2.md' | ...`  
**Example Type for "data" collections:** `'author-1' | 'author-2' | ...`

A unique ID using the file path relative to `src/content/[collection]`. Enumerates all possible string values based on the collection entry file paths. Note that collections [defined as `type: 'content'`](#type) include the file extension in their ID, while collections defined as `type: 'data'` do not.

#### `collection`

**Example Type:** `'blog' | 'authors' | ...`

> The name of the entry's collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The name of a top-level folder under `src/content/` in which entries are located. This is the name used to reference the collection in your schema, and in querying functions.
```
I think we do need to connect this to the directory/folder name, as well as mention that this is what we consider to be the collection's "name" and that it's used in the schema, functions etc. I just blurted this suggestion above out quickly, but that's kind of the idea I'm thinking.

#### `data`

**Type:** `CollectionSchema<TCollectionName>`

An object of frontmatter properties inferred from your collection schema ([see `defineCollection()` reference](#definecollection)). Defaults to `any` if no schema is configured.

> #### Content-specific properties

Reviewer 2: Not entirely sure what to do here, but it's kind of weird that `slug`, `body` and `render` now end up a heading size smaller than the other properties. I wonder if there's a way to identify these as only available for `type:content` without another heading. Is it too terribly messy/ugly to include for each one of these, maybe under **Type**, "available for every collection `type`" or "available for `type: content` collections only"  ??

Author: I spent _so long_ trying this, and it was much more confusing with the "for type whatever" callouts everywhere. I agree the heading levels are annoying though this made it much clearer which were content-specific 😓 If you have a better refactor, push it up! This is the best I could come up with

Reviewer 2: OK, for now let's embrace the weirdness! No need to get this right on the first try. I have no issues with the content, so maybe the proper formatting will just reveal itself to us, eventually.

Author: Took a stab at refactoring to "Available for" callouts instead. Let me know if that's any better!

<img width="661" alt="image" src="https://github.com/withastro/docs/assets/51384119/61eba2f2-4519-4394-86c5-7ebf79ac10c1">

Reviewer 2: I do personally like that better, because I like having all the properties in one place (rather than people needing to know where to go for certain types of properties before even being able to read about them). As the list of `type`s grows (?) we can always consider using "all types" for some properties, and "content only" for others.
